Vester, J.; Olsen, J. M. H.
Assessing the Partial Hessian Approximation in QM/MM-Based Vibrational Analysis
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2024, 20(21), 9533-9546.  DOI 10.1021/acs.jctc.4c00882
Licence: CC-BY 4.0.  Retrieved 2026-09-21 from the Europe PMC REST API
(https://www.ebi.ac.uk/europepmc/webservices/rest/PMC11562069/fullTextXML)
and rendered to plain text.  Formulas and tables are omitted -- see the XML.
==============================================================================

pmcJ Chem Theory ComputJ Chem Theory Comput822acssd101232704ctJournal of Chemical Theory and Computation1549-96181549-9626pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11562069PMC11562069.111562069115620693942333610.1021/acs.jctc.4c008821ArticleAssessing the Partial
Hessian Approximation in QM/MM-Based
Vibrational Analysishttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8584-1295VesterJonas*†https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7487-944XOlsenJógvan Magnus Haugaard*†‡†DTU
Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark‡Hylleraas
Centre for Quantum Molecular Sciences, Department of Chemistry, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway*Email: jvest@kemi.dtu.dk.*Email: jmho@kemi.dtu.dk.1810202412112024202147502395339546080720240710202425092024141120241511202415112024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

The partial Hessian
approximation is often used in vibrational
analysis of quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) systems
because calculating the full Hessian matrix is computationally impractical.
This approach aligns with the core concept of QM/MM, which focuses
on the QM subsystem. Thus, using the partial Hessian approximation
implies that the main interest is in the local vibrational modes of
the QM subsystem. Here, we investigate the accuracy and applicability
of the partial Hessian vibrational analysis (PHVA) approach as it
is typically used within QM/MM, i.e., only the Hessian belonging to
the QM subsystem is computed. We focus on solute–solvent systems
with small, rigid solutes. To separate two of the major sources of
errors, we perform two separate analyses. First, we study the effects
of the partial Hessian approximation on local normal modes, harmonic
frequencies, and harmonic IR and Raman intensities by comparing them
to those obtained using full Hessians, where both partial and full
Hessians are calculated at the QM level. Then, we quantify the errors
introduced by QM/MM used with the PHVA by comparing normal modes,
frequencies, and intensities obtained using partial Hessians calculated
using a QM/MM-type embedding approach to those obtained using partial
Hessians calculated at the QM level. Another aspect of the PHVA is
the appearance of normal modes resembling the translation and rotation
of the QM subsystem. These pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
modes should be removed as they are collective vibrations of the atoms
in the QM subsystem relative to a frozen MM subsystem and, thus, not
well-described. We show that projecting out translation and rotation,
usually done for systems in isolation, can adversely affect other
normal modes. Instead, the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
modes can be identified and removed.

Villum Fonden10.13039/100008398VIL29478Norges ForskningsrÃ¥d10.13039/501100005416262695pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9ct4c00882document-id-new-14ct4c00882ccc-price1Introduction

The simulation of large
molecular systems poses substantial challenges
that are particularly significant when quantum mechanical modeling
is required, such as in calculations or simulations involving chemical
reactions or light–matter interactions. Computational methods
rooted in molecular quantum mechanics are limited to relatively small
systems due to the high computational cost. To tackle this issue,
the common strategy is to employ a multiscale quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics (QM/MM) approach.1−5 Here, the system is partitioned into two subsystems: the region
of interest (the QM subsystem), treated quantum mechanically, and
the surrounding environment (the MM subsystem), described using classical
molecular mechanics. This approach has the benefit of preserving the
atomistic structure of the environment, which is crucial for accurately
representing directional and structural influences on, e.g., molecular
properties. The QM/MM approach enables the calculation of local molecular
properties, including vibrational properties that provide valuable
insights into the chemical structure, bonding characteristics, and
intermolecular interactions.6,7

There are two
main computational approaches for simulating vibrational
spectra. In the dynamic approach, spectra are obtained from Fourier-transformed
time-correlation functions of relevant properties, e.g., dipoles for
infrared (IR) and polarizabilities for Raman spectra, obtained through
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.8−10 In the static approach,
known as vibrational analysis, vibrational frequencies and normal
modes are obtained from an eigenanalysis of the molecular Hessian
and the associated intensities are calculated using geometrical derivatives
of the relevant properties.11 The dynamic
approach includes temperature effects and anharmonicity for the QM
subsystem but may require a relatively large number of property calculations.
In contrast, a vibrational analysis is performed on geometry-optimized
structures, thus requiring fewer calculations, i.e., one per conformer.
However, it does not include temperature effects and requires more
elaborate calculations to include anharmonicity.12,13 In this work, we focus on the vibrational analysis approach as part
of a larger effort to develop an efficient approach to simulate vibrational
spectra of large and complex molecular systems.

Performing vibrational
analysis of large QM/MM systems is impractical
due to the computational cost of calculating the full Hessian, mainly
the computationally expensive derivatives with respect to the positions
of the nuclei in the QM subsystem. One way to reduce the computational
cost is the partial Hessian vibrational analysis (PHVA) approximation.14−16 Using PHVA within QM/MM17−19 usually implies that only geometrical
derivatives with respect to QM nuclei are included, i.e., only the
QM–QM block of the Hessian matrix is calculated, disregarding
the MM–MM, QM–MM, and MM–QM blocks. The outcome
is a system with mobile QM atoms surrounded by immobile MM atoms.
Here, we will refer to this approach as QM/MM-PHVA. Other more advanced
partial Hessian approaches have been proposed, such as the mobile
block Hessian (MBH)20−22 and the vibrational subsystem analysis (VSA)23−25 approaches. In this work, we only consider the PHVA. Specifically,
we will use it with the fragment-based polarizable embedding (PE)
model26,27 extended recently to enable calculations
of analytical Hessians and geometrical property derivatives.28 The fragment-based PE approach is one of several
PE models that implement analytic Hessians using an atomistic polarizable
environment.28−33

The eigenanalysis of the partial Hessian in the QM/MM-PHVA
approach
results in 3N normal modes and corresponding frequencies
(where N is the number of atoms in the QM subsystem).
A minimum of six normal modes (assuming a nonlinear molecule) correspond
to vibrations that can be characterized as full or partial pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational modes because they resemble translations and
rotations of the QM subsystem in a vacuum. These modes would involve
atoms in both the QM and MM subsystems in the full Hessian vibrational
analysis, but because the MM atoms are immobile by design, it is only
the QM atoms that are collectively vibrating inside a cage defined
by the MM atoms. Pseudotranslational and pseudorotational modes are
low-frequency but not necessarily the lowest ones, and moreover, more
than six modes may have pseudotranslational and/or pseudorotational
character. These normal modes are not well described, and there is
thus a need to identify those most affected so they can be filtered
out. The practice of projecting out translation and rotation as part
of the vibrational analysis for molecules in a vacuum is invalid within
the PHVA approximation. Instead, we introduce a simple scheme to identify
the problematic modes and quantify the pseudotranslational and/or
pseudorotational character.

The PHVA approach, using pure QM
and MM methods, has shown promising
results for local modes.34−37 These studies are encouraging for the focused QM/MM-PHVA
approach, which also targets local modes within the QM subsystem.
In our study, we assess the QM/MM-PHVA method, applying it to solute–solvent
systems with small, rigid solutes. We also investigate the impact
of expanding the QM subsystem by including selected solvent molecules.
Our goal is to evaluate the errors introduced by the QM/MM-PHVA approximation
on harmonic frequencies and the corresponding IR and Raman intensities.
To achieve this, we computed full Hessians, dipole gradients, and
polarizability gradients based on full QM calculations for several
model systems. We can assess the errors from the PHVA by comparing
the partial Hessian and property gradients to the full quantities.
Subsequently, we will analyze the discrepancies introduced by the
QM/MM approach by comparing partial Hessians obtained from full QM
calculations to those derived from QM/MM calculations.

2Methods

2.1Computational Details

We use seven
solute–solvent systems to investigate the errors introduced
by the QM/MM-PHVA approach on normal modes, frequencies, IR intensities,
and Raman intensities. The systems consist of single solute molecules
surrounded by multiple solvent molecules: furan in benzene, naphthalene
in acetonitrile, pyridine in methanol, 1,3-butadiene in water, uracil
in methanol, propanamide in water, and formaldehyde in water. The
starting structures were obtained from Reinholdt et al.38 First, we extracted spheres with an 8 Å
radius, where the center of mass of the solutes is at the center of
the spheres. Preliminary calculations indicated that using an 8 Å
radius yields similar frequencies and intensities compared to larger
radii, up to 24 Å. Furthermore, the exact system size is not
critically important since these structures are used for internal
comparison. We also prepared small model systems of pyridine in methanol,
1,3-butadiene in water, uracil in methanol, propanamide in water,
and formaldehyde in water by removing most solvent molecules. Thus,
between 4 and 11 solvent molecules surrounding the solute molecules
were kept (more details in Table 1).

 [formula/table omitted] The HF/pcseg-139 level
of theory was
used for the full QM calculations on the small model systems. For
the QM/MM calculations on the large systems and the small model systems,
the solutes were also modeled at the HF/pcseg-1 level of theory, while
the effects from the surrounding solvent environment were included
using the fragment-based PE model. Additionally, for formaldehyde
in water, we also considered a system where the two water molecules
hydrogen-bonded to the formaldehyde are included in the QM subsystem
and thus also treated at HF/pcseg-1 level of theory. The embedding
potentials representing the solvents were obtained using the PyFraME
Python package.40 Each solvent molecule
is described by atom-centered multipoles, up to and including quadrupoles,
atom-centered dipole–dipole polarizabilities, and a Lennard-Jones
6–12 potential. The multipoles and polarizabilities were derived
using the LoProp scheme41,42 based on PBE0/6-31+G*43−45 calculations performed with the Dalton program package.46,47 The Lennard-Jones parameters were sourced from the GAFF force field,48 as provided by Van der Spoel et al.49 on https://virtualchemistry.org/, with the exception of water
in the formaldehyde in water system, for which the CHARMM TIP3P Lennard-Jones
parameters were applied.50

The geomeTRIC
package51 was used together
with the LSDalton program46,52 for the geometry optimizations.
The environmental contributions for the QM/MM geometry optimizations
were included using the FraME library.53 The small model systems were geometry optimized using full QM and
QM/MM. Note that the solvent was frozen in all QM/MM optimizations.

The molecular properties of interest are the molecular Hessian,
dipole gradients, and polarizability gradients (with incident light
of 514.5 nm). These properties were calculated using LSDalton with
the OpenRSP library,54−56 and using FraME to calculate environmental contributions.
The IR and Raman intensities were derived from the dipole gradients
and the polarizability gradients, respectively, as detailed by Dundas
et al.28 Frequencies and normal modes were
obtained from eigenanalysis of the Hessians.

2.2Quantification
of Pseudotranslation and Pseudorotation

In the following,
we introduce a scheme to quantify pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions in normal modes in the QM/MM-PHVA
approach. Like in standard vibrational analysis, the partial Hessian
is mass-weighted and diagonalized, yielding 3N eigenvectors
and eigenvalues. Then, the solute is centered by translating its center
of mass to the origin of the coordinate system, and the three (or
two if the molecule is linear) principal axes of inertia I1, I2, and I3 are determined. The principal axes of inertia are used to
build vectors that describe rotation. The vectors corresponding to
translations D1, D2, and D3 of the αth atom are defined
as [formula/table omitted] where mα is the atomic mass. The vectors corresponding
to rotations D4, D5, and D6 are defined as [formula/table omitted] where Rα is the position
vector of the αth atom relative to the center
of mass of all atoms. The normalized total vector Dj corresponding to a rotation or translation
of the entire molecule consisting of N atoms can
be written as [formula/table omitted] where cj is a normalization factor. In the case of linear
molecules, D6 will not be generated. The pseudotranslational
contributions in the ith normal mode are defined
as [formula/table omitted] where Li is the ith
normalized eigenvector of the mass-weighted Hessian and D1, D2, and D3 are the normalized vectors describing translation in x, y, and z directions,
respectively. Similarly, the pseudorotational contributions in the ith normal mode are defined as [formula/table omitted] where D4, D5, and D6 are
the normalized vectors describing rotation around the principal axes
of inertia. Since the vectors Dj are normalized and the eigenvectors Li form an orthonormal basis, the following applies: [formula/table omitted] [formula/table omitted] 

2.3Hessian Comparison

We investigate
the errors of the QM/MM-PHVA approach by comparing it to full QM calculations
on the small model systems. For these systems, we calculated full
QM Hessians, dipole gradients, and polarizability gradients, as well
as partial QM/MM Hessians, dipole gradients, and polarizability gradients.
Partial QM Hessians, dipole gradients, and polarizability gradients
were extracted from the full QM quantities.

We used two schemes
to compare the partial and full QM Hessians. The first scheme gives
the contribution of environment molecules to the normal-mode eigenvectors
of the full QM Hessian eigenvectors, which will not be present in
the partial QM or QM/MM Hessians. To quantify this contribution, we
divide each normalized eigenvector into two parts [formula/table omitted] where Ci corresponds to the core QM part (i.e., the
solute) and Ei corresponds
to the MM environment
(i.e., the solvent). Then, we define the environmental contributions
ECi to the ith normal
mode LiFH as [formula/table omitted] with [formula/table omitted] 

To identify
which normal modes to compare from the full and partial
QM Hessians, we calculated the overlap, i.e., the dot product, between
the Ci vectors and the LiPH eigenvectors of the partial QM Hessian. This
shows the similarity between normal modes from the full and partial
QM Hessians. The most similar normal modes were then used for the
second scheme, where the directional deviation between the eigenvectors
of the full and partial QM Hessians was calculated. For this, we define
the angular deviation ADi of the ith normal mode as [formula/table omitted] Here θ is the angle between
the normalized Ci and LiPH vectors. The angular deviation was also used
to compare the partial
QM and QM/MM Hessians.

3Results and Discussion

In the first
part of this section, we investigate the pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions in the normal modes calculated
using the QM/MM approach for the seven solute–solvent systems:
furan in benzene, naphthalene in acetonitrile, pyridine in methanol,
1,3-butadiene in water, uracil in methanol, propanamide in water,
and formaldehyde in water, including also the expanded QM subsystem
for formaldehyde in water. We also investigate how the removal of
the pseudotranslation and pseudorotation through projection, as described
by Wilson et al.,11 affects frequencies,
IR intensities, and Raman intensities of the remaining normal modes.
Then, we turn toward a more detailed assessment of errors introduced,
first, by the partial Hessian approximation and, second, by the use
of QM/MM. To this end, we compare normal modes, frequencies, IR intensities,
and Raman intensities obtained using the full and partial QM Hessians
and the partial QM and QM/MM Hessians, respectively, of the five small
model systems: pyridine in methanol, 1,3-butadiene in water, uracil
in methanol, propanamide in water, and formaldehyde in water, including
again the expanded QM subsystem for formaldehyde in water. In this
context, we note that the eigenvectors and eigenvalues obtained from
the PHVA are directly affected by the reduction of the full Hessian,
whereas the dipole and polarizability gradients, and thus the IR and
Raman intensities, are indirectly affected through the transformation
from Cartesian to mass-weighted internal coordinates. The systems
are summarized in Table 1. The seven large systems are used in the first part (Section 3.1), and the five
small model systems are used in the second part (Sections 3.2 and 3.3).

3.1Pseudotranslation and Pseudorotation

From a theoretical point of view, translation and rotation should
not be projected out of the partial Hessian because, while some normal
modes resemble translation and rotation, they are, in fact, collective
vibrations between the QM and MM subsystems. We refer to those modes
as pseudotranslation and pseudorotation. Instead of projecting out
translation and rotation from the partial Hessian, a more effective
approach is to identify modes with pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions that exceed a threshold and remove them since they are
not well described.

In this study, we have found that the lowest-frequency
modes of a partial Hessian will often be mixtures of internal motions
of the QM subsystem with pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions. The projection results in a redistribution of the internal
motion of the mixed modes to the other modes. This can alter the character
of the affected modes.

Practically, the projection can be performed,
and here we examine
the effect on frequencies, IR intensities, and Raman intensities for
the seven solute–solvent systems. The results for the six solute–solvent
systems where only the solute molecule is in the QM subsystem are
presented in Figure 1, while the results for formaldehyde in water with and without two
solvent molecules in the QM subsystem are presented in Figure 2. Here, we investigate the
absolute differences in frequencies, as well as the relative and normalized
absolute differences in IR and Raman intensities. The normalized absolute
differences refer to normalizing the absolute differences by the maximum
absolute difference across all modes except the six lowest ones. Figures 1 and 2 also include the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions to all normal modes calculated using eqs 4 and 5, respectively.

Figure 1Identification
and quantification of pseudotranslational contributions
(PTC) and pseudorotational contributions (PRC) in normal modes of
a series of solute–solvent systems and a comparison of frequencies,
IR intensities, and Raman intensities before and after projecting
out translation and rotation. Note that some bars are truncated due
to scale limits.

Figure 2Identification and quantification
of pseudotranslational contributions
(PTC) and pseudorotational contributions (PRC) in normal modes of
formaldehyde in water (left) without and (right) with the inclusion
of two water molecules in the QM subsystem and thus in the partial
QM/MM Hessian, as well as a comparison of frequencies, IR intensities,
and Raman intensities before and after projecting out translation
and rotation. Note that some bars are truncated due to scale limits.

Of the six systems presented in Figure 1, the ones that are the least
affected by
the projection are furan in benzene and naphthalene in acetonitrile.
In both cases, most of the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions are in the six lowest-frequency modes. For furan in
benzene, none of the other modes exceed pseudotranslational and -rotational
contributions by more than 0.002%. A few modes in naphthalene in acetonitrile
have pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions of around
0.3%. Although still small, the impact on the Raman intensities of
those modes is substantial, about 30 to 35% relative difference while
also having a considerable absolute difference. In both systems, the
frequency is not altered appreciably by the projection.

In the
cases of pyridine in methanol and 1,3-butadiene in water,
the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions for all
modes except the six lowest-frequency modes go up to around 3%. The
projection affects frequencies, IR intensities, and Raman intensities
for both systems. The maximum frequency difference is around 3 cm–1, while the relative intensity differences are higher
for pyridine in methanol (up to 76% for Raman and 68% for IR) than
for 1,3-butadiene in water (up to 57% for Raman and 52% for IR). The
absolute differences are also substantial for the aforementioned modes
with high relative differences, so we expect to see a noticeable difference
in the spectra for these systems.

Uracil in methanol and propanamide
in water were affected the most
by the projection. In both cases, there is at least one normal mode
outside the six lowest-frequency modes with pseudotranslational and
pseudorotational contributions exceeding 10%. For these normal modes,
the projection substantially impacts the frequencies and intensities.
Specifically for uracil in methanol, normal mode 29 has 14% each pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions, where the frequency changes by
about 17 cm–1, the relative Raman intensity by about
103%, and the relative IR intensity by about 36%. For propanamide
in water, normal mode 30 has 45% pseudorotational and 35% pseudotranslational
contributions, where the change in frequency is about 129 cm–1, about 383% for the Raman intensity, and about 64% for the IR intensity.
For the aforementioned normal modes with high relative differences,
the absolute differences are also substantial and will thus lead to
major differences in the spectra.

In Figure 2, we
examine the effects of adding solvent molecules to the QM subsystem
by comparing calculations on formaldehyde in water with and without
two water molecules in the QM subsystem. In the following and in Figure 2, the latter is referred
to as the formaldehyde–water cluster in water. The results
for formaldehyde in water are consistent with the other solute–solvent
systems presented in Figure 1. Specifically, pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions
are observed only in the six lowest-frequency modes. For all other
normal modes, the frequency errors are minimal, with the highest error
being in normal mode 5, which exhibits a frequency error of around
1 cm–1. Notably, normal mode 5 also shows the greatest
absolute difference in both IR and Raman intensities, with a relative
difference of 9% for IR intensity and 6% for Raman intensity. For
the formaldehyde–water cluster in water, the projection affects
a significantly larger number of normal modes beyond the six lowest-frequency
modes. The majority of pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions
are concentrated in the 13 lowest-frequency modes, each of which shows
contributions of at least 10%. However, up to the 18 lowest-frequency
modes exhibit at least 1% pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions. On most of the 18 lowest-frequency modes, the projection
has a considerable impact on frequencies and intensities. Specifically,
modes 19–24 exhibit substantial frequency errors ranging from
55 to 85 cm–1, all corresponding to intermolecular
stretching or bending modes in the formaldehyde–water cluster.
Interestingly, the normal modes in the formaldehyde–water cluster
that have the greatest overlap with the normal modes in formaldehyde
in water are among the 13 highest-frequency modes, which exhibit similarly
low errors as those in formaldehyde in water. Therefore, the increase
in pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions and the
associated errors seen in the formaldehyde–water cluster likely
stem from the inclusion of the two solvent water molecules to the
QM subsystem.

This analysis shows that projecting out translation
and rotation
can substantially affect frequencies, IR intensities, and Raman intensities.
Generally, the normal modes most affected are the low-frequency ones,
while the high-frequency modes are unaffected. It is also noteworthy
that the IR and Raman intensities are more sensitive than the frequencies.
For example, for a normal mode in 1,3-butadiene in water, the difference
was more than 50% while the frequency only changed by about 3 cm–1. Moreover, by including solvent molecules in the
QM subsystem, the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions
are affecting more normal modes compared to systems without solvent
molecules. In the systems where only the solute is in the QM subsystem,
these contributions are visible in, at most, nine of the lowest-frequency
modes. Clearly, the impact of projection can be substantial, and since
it is also unfounded, a better approach to eliminating the problematic
modes is to quantify the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions and remove the modes with contributions higher than
a threshold.

3.2Comparison between Full
and Partial QM Hessians

To investigate the errors introduced
by the PHVA approximation
itself, i.e., not including errors from QM/MM, we compare the full
and partial QM Hessians as well as the frequencies, IR intensities,
and Raman intensities derived using these Hessians. To keep the computational
cost low, we used the small model systems pyridine in methanol, 1,3-butadiene
in water, uracil in methanol, propanamide in water, and formaldehyde
in water (see Figure 3). For the latter, we also include the formaldehyde–water
cluster in water, i.e., where the two water molecules hydrogen-bonded
to formaldehyde are included in the partial QM Hessian. We compared
the absolute errors in frequencies and relative and normalized absolute
errors in the IR and Raman intensities of the normal modes with a
high similarity according to the method described in Section 2.3. The normalized absolute
error is calculated as the absolute difference divided by the maximum
absolute difference of all normal modes except the six lowest-frequency
modes. In addition to the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions, we also calculated the environmental contribution (eq 9) and angular deviation
(eq 11). The environmental
contribution is a measurement of the degree to which molecules in
the solvent environment are involved in a given normal mode, while
the angular deviations are a measure of the directional similarity
between the vibrations in the solute before and after applying the
PHVA approximation. The results are presented in Figures 4 and 5.

Figure 3Geometries of the five small model systems: pyridine in methanol,
1,3-butadiene in water, uracil in methanol, propanamide in water,
and formaldehyde in water. QM molecules are depicted as van der Waals
spheres and MM molecules as sticks. For formaldehyde in water, we
only depict the formaldehyde–water cluster in water.

Figure 4Comparison of normal modes obtained from full and partial
QM Hessians
of small model systems. Depicted are the environmental contributions
(EC), the angular deviations (AD), the pseudotranslational contributions
(PTC), the pseudorotational contributions (PRC), the frequency change,
and the IR and Raman intensity changes. Note that some bars are truncated
due to scale limits.

Figure 5Comparison of normal
modes obtained from full and partial QM Hessians
of formaldehyde in water (left) without and (right) with the inclusion
of two water molecules in the partial QM Hessian. Depicted are the
environmental contributions (EC), the angular deviations (AD), the
pseudotranslational contributions (PTC), the pseudorotational contributions
(PRC), the frequency change, and the IR and Raman intensity changes.
Note that some bars are truncated due to scale limits.

As expected, normal modes with substantial pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions also include a high environmental
contribution and angular deviation. For the systems without solvent
molecules in the partial Hessian, the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions appear in the six lowest-frequency modes, except in
the case of propanamide in water, where there are also contributions
in the seventh-lowest frequency mode. For the formaldehyde–water
cluster in water, the 12 lowest-frequency modes have non-negligible
pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions. These normal
modes are not well described within the PHVA approximation, which
is also reflected in the high errors in frequencies and intensities.
The following discussion does not consider the normal modes with high
pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions.

To better
understand the errors in the intensities due to the PHVA
approximation, we need to consider the truncation of the dipole and
polarizability gradients, i.e., the removal of the derivatives with
respect to the positions of nuclei in the solvent environment, as
well as the fact that the gradients are transformed using the transformation
matrix obtained from the partial Hessian. Hence, the origin of the
intensity errors can come from the truncation of the Hessian and the
truncation of the gradients. The total impact is reflected by the
relative intensity differences. Since the environmental contributions
are correlated to the expected changes in the transformation matrix,
it is possible to identify for some modes if the high relative intensity
difference is dominated by the truncation of the Hessian or by the
truncation of the gradients. It is important to emphasize that we
also consider the normalized absolute intensity difference, which
is highest for the largest peak in the spectrum and expected to be
considerably large for other intense peaks in the spectrum. Our focus
lies on considering cases where both the normalized absolute intensity
differences and the relative intensity differences are substantial,
as this indicates a noticeable difference in the final spectrum.

For pyridine in methanol, the frequencies are largely unaffected
in the high-frequency part of the spectrum and with minor errors in
the low-frequency part. The maximum error is around 3 cm–1. The impact on IR and Raman intensities, on the other hand, is substantial.
In particular, the IR intensities of normal modes 13, 14, 24, and
25 and the Raman intensity of normal mode 24 have considerable relative
and absolute errors. These four normal modes represent in-plane bending
motions of the pyridine molecule, which couple to the C–O stretching
mode of methanol in the case of modes 13 and 14 and to the torsion
mode of methanol in the case of modes 24 and 25. These modes have
environmental contributions that are removed through the PHVA approximation,
which explains the resulting frequency errors and, to some degree,
the intensity errors. Similar to the normal modes with high errors,
mixing between solute and solvent vibrations is also observed in other
modes, yet the associated frequencies and intensities have low errors.
For example, in normal mode 9, a mixing between an in-plane bending
mode in pyridine and the O–H rocking mode in methanol can be
observed. However, since normal mode 9 has a low intensity in both
the partial and full treatment, the absolute error introduced to the
IR intensities is also low. The degree of environmental contribution
is similar to the other aforementioned modes with higher errors, but
the relative intensity errors are small. Therefore, for this particular
mode, the errors must be dominated by the truncation of the dipole
and polarizability gradients, which, however, does not have a strong
impact on the final intensities.

For 1,3-butadiene in water,
the errors in the frequencies are also
minor, except for mode 24, where the error is about 5 cm–1. The errors in IR and Raman intensities are primarily in the low-frequency
end of the spectrum, where especially normal mode 24 stands out with
large relative and absolute errors for both IR and Raman intensities.
In the high-frequency part of the spectrum, only the IR intensity
of normal mode 8 has substantial relative and absolute errors. Both
of these modes have high environmental contributions. Normal mode
8 includes C=C stretching in 1,3-butadiene that couples to
O–H bending in some water molecules, while normal mode 24 includes
rotation around the central C–C bond in 1,3-butadiene and rotation
of some water molecules. Notably, both IR and Raman intensities for
normal mode 24 become much smaller in the PHVA. This implies that
the water rotation contributes much stronger to the IR and Raman intensities
than the 1,3-butadiene deformation vibration around the central C–C
bond.

In contrast to the other solute–solvent systems,
the normal
modes of uracil in methanol have much higher frequency errors across
the entire spectrum. The frequencies of normal modes 9, 23, 25, and
27 are close to 10 cm–1, while the frequencies of
modes 5, 8, 11, 14, and 29 are around 5 cm–1. All
of these normal modes have clear environmental contributions, and
some low-frequency modes also have angular deviations. However, it
is worth noting that the size of the environmental contributions does
not necessarily correlate with the size of the errors. For example,
the environmental contributions are rather small for normal mode 5,
yet the frequency error is substantial. The IR intensity errors are
most pronounced in normal modes 8, 9, 11, and 14, where the large
environmental contributions come from O–H rocking motions of
methanol that are mixed with in-plane bending modes of uracil. The
Raman intensity errors are highest in normal modes 11, 24, and 25,
where the two latter modes correspond to in-plane bending motions
of uracil mixed with torsion motions of methanol. An explanation for
the frequency errors that appear across the entire frequency range
is that uracil, with its two carbonyl and two amide groups, provides
two hydrogen-bond acceptors and two hydrogen-bond donors. The PHVA
approximation substantially affects the description of the coupling
between the atoms involved in the hydrogen bonds, which are involved
in several normal modes across the entire frequency range.

The
frequency errors for propanamide in water are generally small,
but two modes stand out with high errors, namely modes 23 and 24,
with errors of about 45 and 20 cm–1, respectively.
The intensity errors are mostly prominent in the lower-frequency normal
modes, except for normal mode 1. The largest IR intensity errors are
observed for normal mode 1, 23, 24, and 25. The Raman errors are low
overall. A closer look at normal modes 23, 24, and 25 reveals that
all three modes consist of NH2 wagging motions mixed with
rotations of some water molecules. Normal mode 1, on the other hand,
is a mixture of the NH2 asymmetric stretching mode in propanamide
and the asymmetric stretching mode of some water molecules. All of
these modes have substantial environmental contributions, and the
low-frequency modes also have angular deviations. There are also normal
modes with clear environmental contributions but small errors overall.
This applies to normal modes 8 and 9, which correspond to NH2 bending and C=O stretching motions of propanamide mixed with
water bending motions. Both modes result in a high IR intensity in
both the full and partial counterparts, which indicates that the water
bending contributes little to the IR intensity of these modes.

For formaldehyde in water (results presented in Figure 5), the frequency errors are
generally small, approximately 1 cm–1. Similarly,
the errors are also small for the normal modes local to the formaldehyde
of the formaldehyde–water cluster, i.e., normal modes that
have substantial overlap with the normal modes of formaldehyde in
water, which is normal modes 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 12 in the formaldehyde–water
cluster. These modes have small to no environmental contributions.
Moreover, they do not exhibit substantial errors in absolute or relative
IR and Raman intensities. Conversely, normal modes 1, 2, 3, 4, 8,
and 9 in the formaldehyde–water cluster involve the stretching
and bending of the two water molecules. Modes 13–19 correspond
to intermolecular vibrations in the QM subsystem, with modes 13–18
corresponding to intermolecular bending modes and mode 19 representing
an intermolecular stretching mode. Normal modes involving the two
water molecules in the formaldehyde–water cluster show noticeable
environmental contributions. The largest frequency errors (40–50
cm–1) are observed in the intermolecular bending
modes 13, 15, and 17, while the most considerable errors in IR and
Raman intensities are found in the water stretching modes 2, 3, and
4. Notably, modes 17 and 18 also exhibit substantial relative and
absolute Raman intensity errors. It is expected that molecular vibrations
of the two water molecules are strongly coupled to the motions of
other water molecules due to hydrogen bonding, thus potentially having
a substantial effect on all intramolecular and intermolecular modes
involving water in the partial Hessian. Interestingly, the carbonyl
stretching mode of formaldehyde remains well-described both with and
without including water molecules in the partial Hessian.

Generally,
for normal modes consisting of local vibrational motions
in the solute and solvent separately, using the PHVA approximation
does not have a substantial effect. Conversely, if a normal mode involves
collective motions of atoms in the solute and solvent, the PHVA approximation
may introduce large errors. This becomes especially apparent in the
formaldehyde–water cluster, where the molecular vibrations
of the two water molecules in the cluster are strongly coupled to
the water molecules in the solvent. Although the environmental contribution
does not distinguish between the two cases, large environmental contributions
typically indicate large frequency errors due to the lack of coupling
between solute and solvent atoms in the partial Hessian. However,
as seen in mode 5 for uracil in methanol, the environmental contribution
can be small while large errors still occur. Conversely, there are
also instances, e.g., normal modes 8 and 9 of propanamide in water,
with clear environmental contributions, yet the errors are relatively
small. The intensity errors, on the other hand, are typically dominated
by the truncation of the dipole and polarizability gradients. The
impact of the truncated properties is shown by the relative intensity
differences. Together with the environmental contributions, which
indicate the errors of the transformation matrix, it becomes apparent
for some normal modes if it is the truncation of the Hessian that
dominates or the truncation of the dipole and polarizability gradients.
In the cases investigated here, there are many normal modes with a
high relative intensity error and low environmental contributions.
Thus, the intensity errors are mostly dominated by the truncation
of the dipole and polarizability gradients. The angular deviation
is only visible in the low-frequency part of the spectrum and is generally
negligible in the rest of the spectrum, indicating that the molecular
vibrations in the solute do not change substantially. Although it
cannot be generalized without further investigation, for our test
cases, the IR intensities of the high-frequency modes were more affected
than the Raman intensities. Simultaneous large relative and absolute
errors for the Raman intensities are only observed in a few cases.
For our systems, it is to some degree due to the higher number of
high-intensity normal modes in IR compared to Raman. Also, it is worth
noting that the solvent environment contributes to some high-frequency
modes that are usually considered to be very local, e.g., normal mode
1 of propanamide in water. Hence, one cannot assume that all high-frequency
modes will not be affected by the PHVA approximation. The inclusion
of water molecules in the partial Hessian of the formaldehyde in water
system did not impact the local modes of the formaldehyde but resulted
in high errors in the delocalized normal modes corresponding to intermolecular
modes within the formaldehyde–water cluster and in the normal
modes of the two included water molecules.

3.3Comparison
between Partial QM and QM/MM Hessians

Here, we investigate
the differences between the normal modes obtained
from the partial QM and QM/MM Hessians. The partial QM Hessian is
considered the reference for the partial QM/MM Hessian. The errors
observed here are thus in addition to those found in the previous
section. However, it is possible that there is a cancellation of errors.
We look at the angular deviation between the normal modes, the absolute
difference in pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions,
the absolute difference in frequencies, and the relative and normalized
absolute difference in IR and Raman intensities. The results of this
investigation are shown in Figures 6 and 7. The QM/MM geometries
were obtained from a constrained QM/MM geometry optimization of the
fully optimized structures in Figure 3. To check the similarity between the QM- and QM/MM-optimized
structures, we calculated the root-mean-square deviations (RMSDs)
of the nuclear positions. The RMSDs are 0.20 Å for pyridine in
methanol, 0.31 Å for 1,3-butadiene in water, 0.02 Å for
uracil in methanol, and 0.06 Å for propanamide in water. The
structural differences are thus larger for pyridine in methanol and
1,3-butadiene in water than for propanamide in water and uracil in
methanol. Since the solvent environments are frozen, the RMSDs are
from the solute only. The change in geometry can be internally in
the solute and displacements of the solute as a whole within the solvent
cage. For formaldehyde in water, the RMSD is 0.05 Å. In the formaldehyde–water
cluster in water, the RMSD increases to 0.21 Å, which includes
the contribution from changes in the geometry of the two water molecules.
When the water molecules in the formaldehyde–water cluster
are not considered, the RMSD for formaldehyde alone is 0.05 Å.
Additionally, the RMSD between the formaldehyde molecules in the two
QM/MM systems is 0.04 Å.

Figure 6Comparison of normal modes obtained from the
partial QM and QM/MM
Hessians of small models systems. Depicted are the angular deviations
(AD), the absolute difference in pseudotranslational contributions
(PTC), the absolute difference in pseudorotational contributions (PRC),
the frequency change, and the IR and Raman intensity changes. Note
that some bars are truncated due to scale limits.

Figure 7Comparison
of normal modes obtained from the partial QM and QM/MM
Hessians of formaldehyde in water (left) without and (right) with
the inclusion of two water molecules. Depicted are the angular deviations
(AD), the absolute difference in pseudotranslational contributions
(PTC), the absolute difference in pseudorotational contributions (PRC),
the frequency change, and the IR and Raman intensity changes. Note
that some bars are truncated due to scale limits.

For pyridine in methanol, the errors in the frequencies
are mostly
below 10 cm–1, apart from those of normal modes
4, 17, 21, 25, and 26 that go above. The IR intensities associated
with normal modes 4 and 23 have high relative and absolute errors,
and the same applies to the Raman intensities of normal modes 3, 4,
5, and 17. The change in pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions occurs only in the six lowest frequency modes. The angular
deviations are relatively high for the high-frequency modes 2, 3,
4, and 5, as well as for the lower-frequency modes 15, 16, 17, 18,
and 19. This could explain the errors observed for those modes. Based
on our results, we are not able to quantify to which degree the angular
deviations stem from structural or property differences.

Similarly,
for butadiene in water there are errors in the frequencies
of most normal modes, although they are overall lower. For normal
modes 3, 16, and 24, the frequency error is around 10 cm–1, while high relative and absolute errors are found for the IR intensity
of normal mode 15 and the Raman intensities of normal modes 16 and
24. The partial QM/MM Hessian results in a small pseudorotational
contribution in normal mode 24, i.e., the seventh-lowest frequency
mode. This may explain the high frequency and Raman intensity errors
associated with this mode. The angular deviations are relatively small
for all normal modes except the four lowest frequency modes. This
is surprising when considering that the RMSD between the QM and QM/MM
geometries is larger than the one for pyridine in methanol, where
the angular deviations were substantially larger.

The normal
modes of both uracil in methanol and propanamide in
water have large frequency errors. Especially modes 1, 2, and 18 in
uracil in methanol and modes 1, 2, and 21 in propanamide in water
have errors close to or above 100 cm–1. These large
errors seem to be related to the fact that all of the modes include
vibrations of an N–H moiety that is involved in hydrogen bonds
to solvent molecules. Hydrogen bonds crossing the QM–MM boundary
are only partially described within the QM/MM model. This is also
reflected through the change in the N–H bond length that increases
by 0.015 Å for uracil in methanol and 0.017 Å for propanamide
in water when going from full QM to QM/MM, indicating too strong hydrogen
bonds. Additionally, the frequency errors are likely made worse by
basis-set superposition errors in the reference calculations. On the
other hand, the normal modes that include C=O stretching, i.e.,
modes 5 and 6 in uracil in methanol and modes 8 and 9 in propanamide
in water, which are also involved in hydrogen bonds, have relatively
low errors. Unlike the N–H bond length, the C=O bond
length does not change substantially in uracil in methanol. In propanamide
in water, the C=O bond is elongated by 0.012 Å. This is
in line with the difference in angular deviations of the modes. The
lower errors of the C=O stretching modes compared to the N–H
stretching suggest a higher sensitivity for hydrogen-bond donors than
for hydrogen-bond acceptors. In regards to the pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions, although small, there are changes
outside of the six lowest frequency modes. For example, for normal
mode 30 for uracil in methanol and normal modes 27, 28, 29, and 30
for propanamide in water. Except for normal mode 30 for propanamide
in water, all of these modes had no contributions in the partial QM
Hessian and, therefore, arose solely from the partial QM/MM Hessian.

In the comparison of formaldehyde in water and the formaldehyde–water
cluster in water, we focus on the local vibrational modes of formaldehyde
as those are the ones of main interest. The normal modes of formaldehyde
in water are asymmetric C–H2 stretching (mode 1),
symmetric C–H2 stretching (mode 2), C=O stretching
(mode 3), C–H2 scissoring (mode 4), C–H2 rocking (mode 5), and C–H2 wagging (mode
6) which in the formaldehyde–water cluster correspond to normal
modes 4, 5, 8, 10, 12, and 13, respectively.

The asymmetric
C–H2 stretching mode of formaldehyde
in water is reproduced well by the QM/MM-PHVA with minor frequency
and intensity errors. Increasing the size of the QM subsystem results
in a larger frequency error of 23 cm–1 and also
larger but minor relative and absolute Raman intensity errors. In
the symmetric C–H2 stretching mode, the frequency
error is slightly reduced from 13 to 12 cm–1. In
contrast, the improvement of the C=O stretching mode is more
substantial. Here the frequency error is lowered from 14 to 8 cm–1. The intensities are also substantially improved
in terms of normalized absolute difference, but the relative errors
are small in both systems, so it is not likely to be visible in a
spectrum. The C–H2 scissoring mode is well described
in both systems but slightly worse in the formaldehyde–water
cluster, while the C–H2 rocking and wagging modes
are reproduced better using the expanded QM subsystem. For the scissoring
mode, the frequency error goes up from 0 to 3 cm–1, but intensities are slightly improved. In the rocking and wagging
modes, the frequency errors are reduced from 10 to 0 cm–1 and 13 to 7 cm–1, respectively, and the intensities
of the rocking mode are also improved.

Overall, the partial
QM/MM PHVA approach increases the pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions to other low-frequency modes outside
of the six lowest ones. Thus, it becomes more important to investigate
the pseudotranslation and pseudorotational contributions. The angular
deviations are considerable for all systems in different parts of
the frequency spectrum. Overall, the intensities obtained from the
QM PHVA are largely reproduced by the QM/MM PHVA. Substantial errors
were only observed for a few modes. Concerning frequencies, the errors
are mostly below 10 cm–1, but in some cases they
are higher. Very high errors of 100 to 200 cm–1 are
observed for normal modes involving hydrogen-bond donors, such as
those in uracil in methanol and propanamide in water. For the formaldehyde
in water system, expanding the QM subsystem to include the two hydrogen-bonded
water molecules led to improvements in some vibrational modes but
also had adverse effects on others. Notably, the C=O stretching
mode was better reproduced, which is expected given the enhanced interaction
with the solvent environment. The adverse effects could be due to
an imbalanced description of the solvent environment. Thus, to gain
an overall improved description, it would be preferable to enclose
the solute with additional QM solvent molecules.

4Conclusions

In this work, we analyzed
the accuracy and applicability
of the
PHVA approximation when used with QM/MM for solute–solvent
systems with small, rigid solutes. To assess the errors, we examined
the normal modes of seven different systems and their associated frequencies,
IR intensities, and Raman intensities. For one of the systems, we
also investigated the effects of expanding the QM subsystem by including
solvent molecules.

First, we addressed how to identify vibrational
modes of the QM
subsystem that include relative motions between the QM and MM subsystems
and can be characterized as pseudotranslation and pseudorotation.
This revealed that up to nine of the lowest-frequency modes were affected
for the systems where the QM subsystem only included the solute. For
the system with an expanded QM subsystem, 13 normal modes were affected,
indicating that larger and more flexible QM subsystems are more prone
to experiencing pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions
in their normal modes. This suggests that as the QM subsystem is expanded
to include more solvent molecules, the coupling between the QM and
MM subsystems becomes more pronounced, leading to additional modes
being influenced by these mixed motions. As a result, careful attention
must be paid to properly identifying and removing these pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational modes to avoid misinterpreting the vibrational
spectrum. We also investigated the impact of removing the pseudotranslational
and pseudorotational contributions by projecting out translation and
rotation. This will remove the pseudotranslational and pseudorotational
contributions, but since the modes are usually mixed modes, any internal
motion of the affected modes is redistributed to other modes. Thus,
some normal modes can be adversely affected by the projection. Instead
of projecting out translation and rotation, the normal modes with
substantial pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions
should be removed.

In the next analysis, we investigated the
errors that are introduced
through the PHVA approximation by comparing full and partial QM Hessians.
This comparison revealed that if the environment participates in a
normal mode, the errors in frequencies due to the PHVA approximation
generally increase. However, with respect to the errors in the intensities,
the truncation of the dipole and polarizability gradients was mostly
the dominating factor rather than the transformation to normal coordinates
using an approximate transformation matrix. Thus, there were cases
where the environment did not contribute particularly strongly to
a normal mode, but still substantial changes in the intensity were
observed. Regarding the angular deviations, they were mainly observed
in the low-frequency part of the spectrum. Thus, the vibrational motions
of the QM subsystem in the other parts of the spectrum were largely
unaltered. Although the environmental contributions were also most
prominent in the low-frequency part, there were, in some cases, also
substantial contributions to the higher-frequency modes. The expanded
QM subsystem did not have any negative effect on the local normal
modes of the solute compared to the nonexpanded QM subsystem.

Finally, we investigated the errors that are introduced by the
QM/MM PHVA compared to the QM PHVA. Here, we observed very large
errors in the frequencies of normal modes involving hydrogen-bond
donors that hydrogen bond with solvent molecules in the environment.
The intensities were less affected overall in terms of having simultaneously
large relative and absolute errors. Only a few normal modes had substantial
intensity errors. An additional source of error introduced by the
QM/MM PHVA is the structural differences, which we quantified by calculating
the root-mean-square deviations (RMSD) of nuclear positions. Although
larger RMSDs could be observed for two of the systems, which most
likely contributed substantially to the overall errors of these systems,
they were not necessarily the most critical factor since the systems
with low RMSDs had higher errors than the ones with high RMSDs. The
angular deviations revealed that many normal modes from the QM/MM
Hessians were dissimilar in direction compared to the normal modes
from the partial QM Hessians, potentially due to the aforementioned
difference in geometries. Nonetheless, we were not able to find a
clear correlation between the errors and the angular deviations. Our
results based on calculations using an expanded QM subsystem show
that while some vibrational modes improved, others were negatively
affected, most likely due to an imbalanced description of the solvent
environment. Including more QM solvent molecules may enhance overall
accuracy.

In summary, our investigations give insights into
the errors in
the vibrational frequencies and associated IR and Raman intensities
when using the PHVA approximation both for full QM and QM/MM approaches.
Notably, the errors were more pronounced in the low-frequency part
of the spectrum, but they can also be substantial in the higher-frequency
parts. Additionally, we show how to identify normal modes with high
pseudotranslational and pseudorotational contributions so that they
can be removed since they are poorly described within the PHVA approximations.
Lastly, with regard to the QM/MM scheme, our work shows that hydrogen-bonded
solvent molecules should be included in the QM subsystem to avoid
very large errors. In particular, when there are hydrogen-bond donors
in the QM subsystem.

Data Availability Statement

The data presented
in this paper is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12684650

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Magnus Ringholm for
insightful
discussions that enriched this paper. J.M.H.O. gratefully acknowledges
financial support from VILLUM FONDEN (Grant No. VIL29478) and the
Research Council of Norway through its Centres of Excellence scheme
(Grant No. 262695). Computational resources for this work were provided
by DeiC National HPC (g.a. DeiC-DTU-N2-2023026) and used at the Danish
National Life Science Supercomputing Center, Computerome.

References

WarshelA.; LevittM.
Theoretical studies
of enzymic reactions: dielectric,
electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the
reaction of lysozyme. J. Mol. Biol.
1976, 103, 227–249. 10.1016/0022-2836(76)90311-9.985660
SennH. M.; ThielW.
QM/MM studies of enzymes. Curr. Opin. Chem.
Biol.
2007, 11, 182–187. 10.1016/j.cbpa.2007.01.684.17307018
LinH.; TruhlarD. G.
QM/MM:
what have we learned, where are we, and where
do we go from here?. Theor. Chem. Acc.
2007, 117, 185–199. 10.1007/s00214-006-0143-z.SennH. M.; ThielW.
QM/MM methods for biomolecular
systems. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed.
2009, 48, 1198–1229. 10.1002/anie.200802019.19173328BrunkE.; RothlisbergerU.
Mixed Quantum Mechanical/Molecular Mechanical Molecular
Dynamics Simulations of Biological Systems in Ground and Electronically
Excited States. Chem. Rev.
2015, 115, 6217–6263. 10.1021/cr500628b.25880693
MorzanU. N.; Alonso de ArminoD. J.; FogliaN. O.; RamirezF.; Gonzalez
LebreroM. C.; ScherlisD. A.; EstrinD. A.
Spectroscopy in
complex environments from QM–MM simulations. Chem. Rev.
2018, 118, 4071–4113. 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00026.29561145
BaizC. R.; BłasiakB.; BredenbeckJ.; ChoM.; ChoiJ.-H.; CorcelliS. A.; DijkstraA. G.; FengC.-J.; Garrett-RoeS.; GeN.-H.; Hanson-HeineM. W. D.; HirstJ. D.; JansenT. L. C.; KwacK.; KubarychK. J.; LonderganC. H.; MaekawaH.; ReppertM.; SaitoS.; RoyS.; SkinnerJ. L.; StockG.; StraubJ. E.; ThielgesM. C.; TominagaK.; TokmakoffA.; ToriiH.; WangL.; WebbL. J.; ZanniM. T.
Vibrational Spectroscopic Map, Vibrational
Spectroscopy, and Intermolecular Interaction. Chem. Rev.
2020, 120, 7152–7218. 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00813.32598850
PMC7710120GaigeotM.-P.; SprikM.
Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics Computation of the Infrared Spectrum
of Aqueous Uracil. J. Phys. Chem. B
2003, 107, 10344–10358. 10.1021/jp034788u.ThomasM.; BrehmM.; FliggR.; VöhringerP.; KirchnerB.
Computing vibrational spectra from
ab initio molecular
dynamics. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2013, 15, 6608–6622. 10.1039/c3cp44302g.23416970
DitlerE.; LuberS.
Vibrational spectroscopy
by means of first-principles molecular dynamics
simulations. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput.
Mol. Sci.
2022, 12, e160510.1002/wcms.1605.WilsonE. B.; DeciusJ. C.; CrossP. C.Molecular Vibrations:
The Theory of Infrared and Raman Vibrational Spectra; Dover Publications, New York, 1955.BaroneV.
Anharmonic
vibrational properties by a fully automated second-order perturbative
approach. J. Chem. Phys.
2005, 122, 01410810.1063/1.1824881.15638643BloinoJ.; BaroneV.
A second-order perturbation theory route to vibrational
averages and transition properties of molecules: general formulation
and application to infrared and vibrational circular dichroism spectroscopies. J. Chem. Phys.
2012, 136, 12410810.1063/1.3695210.22462836
JinS.; HeadJ. D.
Theoretical investigation
of molecular water adsorption
on the Al (111) surface. Surf. Sci.
1994, 318, 204–216. 10.1016/0039-6028(94)90355-7.CalvinM. D.; HeadJ. D.; JinS.
Theoretically
modelling the water
bilayer on the Al (111) surface using cluster calculations. Surf. Sci.
1996, 345, 161–172. 10.1016/0039-6028(95)00862-4.HeadJ. D.
Computation
of vibrational frequencies for adsorbates on surfaces. Int. J. Quantum Chem.
1997, 65, 827–838. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-461X(1997)65:5&lt;827::AID-QUA47&gt;3.0.CO;2-U.CuiQ.; KarplusM.
Molecular properties
from combined QM/MM methods. I.
Analytical second derivative and vibrational calculations. J. Chem. Phys.
2000, 112, 1133–1149. 10.1063/1.480658.LiH.; JensenJ. H.
Partial Hessian vibrational analysis: the localization
of the molecular vibrational energy and entropy. Theor. Chem. Acc.
2002, 107, 211–219. 10.1007/s00214-001-0317-7.NonellaM.; MathiasG.; TavanP.
Infrared Spectrum of
p-Benzoquinone
in Water Obtained from a QM/MM Hybrid Molecular Dynamics Simulation. J. Phys. Chem. A
2003, 107, 8638–8647. 10.1021/jp027747r.GhyselsA.; Van NeckD.; Van SpeybroeckV.; VerstraelenT.; WaroquierM.
Vibrational modes in partially optimized molecular
systems. J. Chem. Phys.
2007, 126, 22410210.1063/1.2737444.17581039
GhyselsA.; Van NeckD.; WaroquierM.
Cartesian formulation of the mobile
block Hessian approach to vibrational analysis in partially optimized
systems. J. Chem. Phys.
2007, 127, 16410810.1063/1.2789429.17979320
GhyselsA.; WoodcockH. L.; LarkinJ. D.; MillerB. T.; ShaoY.; KongJ.; NeckD. V.; SpeybroeckV. V.; WaroquierM.; BrooksB. R.
Efficient Calculation of QM/MM Frequencies
with the Mobile Block Hessian. J. Chem. Theory
Comput.
2011, 7, 496–514. 10.1021/ct100473f.26596169
ZhengW.; BrooksB. R.
Probing the local
dynamics of nucleotide-binding pocket
coupled to the global dynamics: myosin versus kinesin. Biophys. J.
2005, 89, 167–178. 10.1529/biophysj.105.063305.15879477
PMC1366515WoodcockH. L.; ZhengW.; GhyselsA.; ShaoY.; KongJ.; BrooksB. R.
Vibrational subsystem analysis: A
method for probing
free energies and correlations in the harmonic limit. J. Chem. Phys.
2008, 129, 21410910.1063/1.3013558.19063546
PMC2676147HafnerJ.; ZhengW.
Approximate normal mode analysis based on vibrational subsystem analysis
with high accuracy and efficiency. J. Chem.
Phys.
2009, 130, 19411110.1063/1.3141022.19466825
OlsenJ. M.; AidasK.; KongstedJ.
Excited states in solution through
polarizable embedding. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2010, 6, 3721–3734. 10.1021/ct1003803.OlsenJ. M. H.; KongstedJ.Advances in Quantum Chemistry; Elsevier, 2011; Vol. 61, pp 107–143.DundasK. O. H. M.; BeerepootM. T.; RingholmM.; ReineS.; BastR.; ListN. H.; KongstedJ.; RuudK.; OlsenJ. M. H.
Harmonic
infrared and Raman spectra in molecular environments using the polarizable
embedding model. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2021, 17, 3599–3617. 10.1021/acs.jctc.0c01323.34009969
PMC8278393LippariniF.; CappelliC.; ScalmaniG.; De MitriN.; BaroneV.
Analytical
first and second derivatives for a fully polarizable QM/classical
hamiltonian. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2012, 8, 4270–4278. 10.1021/ct300635c.26605590
GiovanniniT.; OlszowkaM.; CappelliC.
Effective
fully polarizable QM/MM
approach to model vibrational circular dichroism spectra of systems
in aqueous solution. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2016, 12, 5483–5492. 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00768.27704812
GiovanniniT.; OlszowkaM.; EgidiF.; CheesemanJ. R.; ScalmaniG.; CappelliC.
Polarizable embedding
approach for
the analytical calculation of Raman and Raman optical activity spectra
of solvated systems. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2017, 13, 4421–4435. 10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00628.28767240
BeccaJ. C.; ChenX.; JensenL.
A discrete
interaction model/quantum
mechanical method for simulating surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
in solution. J. Chem. Phys.
2021, 154, 22470510.1063/5.0051256.34241237
PeiZ.; MaoY.; ShaoY.; LiangW.
Analytic high-order energy derivatives
for metal nanoparticle-mediated infrared and Raman scattering spectra
within the framework of quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics model
with induced charges and dipoles. J. Chem. Phys.
2022, 157, 16411010.1063/5.0118205.36319412
PMC9616608BesleyN. A.; MetcalfK. A.
Computation of the amide I band of polypeptides and
proteins using a partial Hessian approach. J.
Chem. Phys.
2007, 126, 03510110.1063/1.2426344.17249900
GhyselsA.; Van SpeybroeckV.; PauwelsE.; CatakS.; BrooksB. R.; Van NeckD.; WaroquierM.
Comparative study of various normal
mode analysis techniques based on partial Hessians. J. Comput. Chem.
2010, 31, 994–1007. 10.1002/jcc.21386.19813181
PMC4245204Hanson-HeineM. W. D.; GeorgeM. W.; BesleyN. A.
Rapid anharmonic vibrational corrections
derived from partial Hessian analysis. J. Chem.
Phys.
2012, 136, 22410210.1063/1.4727853.22713031
BowlingP. E.; DasguptaS.; HerbertJ. M.
Eliminating imaginary vibrational
frequencies in quantum-chemical cluster models of enzymatic active
sites. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2024, 64, 3912–3922. 10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00221.38648614
ReinholdtP.; Van den HeuvelW.; KongstedJ.
Analytic geometric gradients for
the polarizable density embedding model. Int.
J. Quantum Chem.
2023, 123, e2717710.1002/qua.27177.37002869JensenF.
Unifying general
and segmented contracted basis sets. Segmented polarization consistent
basis sets. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2014, 10, 1074–1085. 10.1021/ct401026a.26580184
OlsenJ. M. H.; ReinholdtP.PyFraME: Python
Framework for Fragment-based Multiscale Embedding, 2021; 10.5281/zenodo.4899311.GagliardiL.; LindhR.; KarlströmG.
Local properties of quantum chemical
systems: The LoProp approach. J. Chem. Phys.
2004, 121, 4494–4500. 10.1063/1.1778131.15332879
VahtrasO.LoProp for Dalton, 2015; 10.5281/zenodo.13276.FranclM. M.; PietroW. J.; HehreW. J.; BinkleyJ. S.; GordonM. S.; DeFreesD. J.; PopleJ. A.
Self-consistent
molecular orbital
methods. XXIII. A polarization-type basis set for second-row elements. J. Chem. Phys.
1982, 77, 3654–3665. 10.1063/1.444267.HehreW. J.; DitchfieldR.; PopleJ. A.
Self—consistent molecular
orbital methods. XII. Further extensions of Gaussian—type basis
sets for use in molecular orbital studies of organic molecules. J. Chem. Phys.
1972, 56, 2257–2261. 10.1063/1.1677527.ClarkT.; ChandrasekharJ.; SpitznagelG. W.; SchleyerP. V. R.
Efficient diffuse
function-augmented basis sets for anion calculations. III. The 3-21+
G basis set for first-row elements, Li–F. J. Comput. Chem.
1983, 4, 294–301. 10.1002/jcc.540040303.AidasK.; AngeliC.; BakK. L.; BakkenV.; BastR.; BomanL.; ChristiansenO.; CimiragliaR.; CorianiS.; DahleP.; DalskovE. K.; EkströmU.; EnevoldsenT.; EriksenJ. J.; EttenhuberP.; FernándezB.; FerrighiL.; FlieglH.; FredianiL.; HaldK.; HalkierA.; HättigC.; HeibergH.; HelgakerT.; HennumA. C.; HettemaH.; HjertenæsE.; HøstS.; HøyvikI.-M.; IozziM. F.; JansíkB.; JensenH. J. Aa.; JonssonD.; JørgensenP.; KauczorJ.; KirpekarS.; KjærgaardT.; KlopperW.; KnechtS.; KobayashiR.; KochH.; KongstedJ.; KrappA.; KristensenK.; LigabueA.; LutnæsO. B.; MeloJ. I.; MikkelsenK. V.; MyhreR. H.; NeissC.; NielsenC. B.; NormanP.; OlsenJ.; OlsenJ. M. H.; OstedA.; PackerM. J.; PawlowskiF.; PedersenT. B.; ProvasiP. F.; ReineS.; RinkeviciusZ.; RudenT. A.; RuudK.; RybkinV. V.; SałekP.; SamsonC. C. M.; de MerásA. S.; SaueT.; SauerS. P. A.; SchimmelpfennigB.; SneskovK.; SteindalA. H.; Sylvester-HvidK. O.; TaylorP. R.; TealeA. M.; TellgrenE. I.; TewD. P.; ThorvaldsenA. J.; ThøgersenL.; VahtrasO.; WatsonM. A.; WilsonD. J. D.; ZiolkowskiM.; ÅgrenH.
The Dalton
quantum chemistry program system. Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci.
2014, 4, 269–284. 10.1002/wcms.1172.25309629
PMC4171759DALTON, a Molecular
Electronic Structure Program. Release v2020.1. 2022; http://daltonprogram.org.WangJ.; WolfR. M.; CaldwellJ. W.; KollmanP. A.; CaseD. A.
Development
and testing of a general amber force field. J. Comput. Chem.
2004, 25, 1157–1174. 10.1002/jcc.20035.15116359
Van
der SpoelD.; GhahremanpourM. M.; LemkulJ. A.
Small molecule thermochemistry:
a tool for empirical force field development. J. Phys. Chem. A
2018, 122, 8982–8988. 10.1021/acs.jpca.8b09867.30362355
MacKerellA. D.; BashfordD.; BellottM.; DunbrackR. L.; EvanseckJ. D.; FieldM. J.; FischerS.; GaoJ.; GuoH.; HaS.; Joseph-McCarthyD.; KuchnirL.; KuczeraK.; LauF. T.; MattosC.; MichnickS.; NgoT.; NguyenD. T.; ProdhomB.; ReiherW. E.; RouxB.; SchlenkrichM.; SmithJ. C.; StoteR.; StraubJ.; WatanabeM.; Wiórkiewicz-KuczeraJ.; YinD.; KarplusM.
All-atom empirical potential for molecular modeling
and dynamics studies of proteins. J. Phys. Chem.
B
1998, 102, 3586–3616. 10.1021/jp973084f.24889800
WangL.-P.; SongC.
Geometry optimization
made simple with translation and rotation coordinates. J. Chem. Phys.
2016, 144, 21410810.1063/1.4952956.27276946
LSDalton, a Linear
Scaling Molecular Electronic Structure
Program, Release v2020.0. 2020; http://daltonprogram.org.OlsenJ. M. H.; DundasK. O. H. M.; RingholmM.FraME: A Library
for Fragment-based Multiscale Embedding. https://gitlab.com/FraME-projects/FraME, 2022; Commit: 36da0fc6.ThorvaldsenA. J.; RuudK.; KristensenK.; JørgensenP.; CorianiS.
A density matrix-based quasienergy formulation of the
Kohn-Sham density functional response theory using perturbation-and
time-dependent basis sets. J. Chem. Phys.
2008, 129, 21410810.1063/1.2996351.19063545
RingholmM.; JonssonD.; RuudK.
A general, recursive, and open-ended
response code. J. Comput. Chem.
2014, 35, 622–633. 10.1002/jcc.23533.24500816
BastR.; FrieseD. H.; GaoB.; JonssonD. J.; RingholmM.; ReineS.
S.; RuudK.OpenRSP: Open-Ended Response
Theory. 2020; https://zenodo.org/record/1491927.